"The future is already here — it's just not very evenly distributed." -- William Gibson, futurist.

Who will reap the benefits of robot/AI labor? Unless politicians act, it will accrue to the top 1%.

When Watson famously won a round of Jeopardy! against the two best human players of all time, it needed a computer the size of a bedroom to answer questions like this. That was only seven years ago. Now, it can be done on a phone.

 Last October, an Uber trucking subsidiary named Otto delivered 2,000 cases of Budweiser 120 miles from Fort Collins, Colorado, to Colorado Springs—without a driver at the wheel. Within a few years, this technology will go from prototype to full production, and that means millions of truck drivers will be out of a job.

  By now everyone’s heard the predictions that self-driving cars could lead to 5 million jobs being lost, but few people understand that once artificial-intelligence software is good enough to drive a car, it will be good enough to do a lot of other things too. It won’t be millions of people out of work; it will be tens of millions.

  While we’re nowhere near human-level AI yet, the progress of the past couple of decades has been stunning. After many years of nothing much happening, suddenly robots can play chess better than the best grandmaster. They can play Jeopardy! better than the best humans. They can drive cars around San Francisco—and they’re getting better at it every year. They can recognize faces well enough that Welsh police recently made the first-ever arrest in the United Kingdom using facial recognition software. After years of plodding progress in voice recognition, Google announced earlier this year that it had reduced its word error rate from 8.5 percent to 4.9 percent in 10 months.

   To start, hardware designers will invent faster, more specialized chips. Google, for example, announced last spring that it had created a microchip called a Tensor Processing Unit, which it claimed was up to 30 times faster and 80 times more power efficient than an Intel processor for machine learning tasks.

   We’ve finally built computers with roughly the raw processing power of the human brain—although only at a cost of more than $100 million and with an internal architecture that may or may not work well for emulating the human mind. But in another 10 years, this level of power will likely be available for less than $1 million

    Even if AI creates lots of new jobs, it’s of no consequence. No matter what job you name, robots will be able to do it.

This gives us four basic categories of work:

Routine physical: digging ditches, driving trucks

Routine cognitive: accounts-payable clerk, telephone sales, retail sales, administrative assistant

Nonroutine physical: short-order cook, home health aide

Nonroutine cognitive: teacher, doctor, CEO

“High-level machine intelligence” (HLMI) is achieved when unaided machines can accomplish every task better and more cheaply than human workers.

 The consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers recently released a study saying much the same. It predicts that 38 percent of all jobs in the United States are “at high risk of automation” by the early 2030s

  World Economic Forum predicts that the rich world will lose 5 million jobs to robots by 2020, while a group of AI experts, writing in Scientific American, figures that 40 percent of the 500 biggest companies will vanish within a decade.

  Elon Musk and Bill Gates both warn of the dangers of AI. Musk believes AI to be a greater threat to humanity than nuclear weapons.

  Suppose it’s 1940 and Lake Michigan has (somehow) been emptied. Your job is to fill it up using the following rule: To start off, you can add one fluid ounce of water to the lake bed. Eighteen months later, you can add two. In another 18 months, you can add four ounces. And so on. Obviously this is going to take a while.

By 1950, you have added around a gallon of water. But you keep soldiering on. By 1960, you have a bit more than 150 gallons. By 1970, you have 16,000 gallons, about as much as an average suburban swimming pool.

At this point it’s been 30 years, and even though 16,000 gallons is a fair amount of water, it’s nothing compared to the size of Lake Michigan. To the naked eye you’ve made no progress at all.

So let’s skip all the way ahead to 2000. Still nothing. You have—maybe—a slight sheen on the lake floor. How about 2010? You have a few inches of water here and there. This is ridiculous. It’s now been 70 years and you still don’t have enough water to float a goldfish. Surely this task is futile?

But wait. Just as you’re about to give up, things suddenly change. By 2020, you have about 40 feet of water. And by 2025 you’re done. After 70 years you had nothing. Fifteen years later, the job was finished.

 At one point, for example, we thought that playing chess at a high level would be a mark of human-level intelligence. Then, in 1997, IBM’s Deep Blue supercomputer beat world champion Garry Kasparov, and suddenly we decided that playing grandmaster-level chess didn’t imply high intelligence after all.

Computing power is measured in calculations per second—a.k.a. floating-point operations per second, or “flops”—and the best estimates of the human brain suggest that our own processing power is about equivalent to 10 petaflops. (“Peta” comes after giga and tera.) That’s a lot of flops, but last year an IBM Blue Gene/Q supercomputer at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory was clocked at 16.3 petaflops.

Robots are likely to cause mass unemployment beginning in 2030. In the meantime, routine tasks are being automated away, local stores are being put out of business by Amazon's cost-savings due to robots/AI.

The US Postal Service, for example, used to employ humans to sort letters, but for some time now, that’s been done largely by machines that can recognize human handwriting. 

Remember Watson, the Jeopardy!-playing computer? It’s now being fed millions of pages of medical information so that it can help physicians do a better job of diagnosing diseases. In another decade, there’s a good chance that Watson will be able to do this without any human help at all.

A McKenzie study reports that up to 1/3 of US jobs could be displaced by 2030.


